#   -*- mode: org; fill-column: 60 -*-
#+TITLE: Interfaces
#+STARTUP: showall
#+PROPERTY: filename
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: 
  :Name:      /home/deerpig/proj/chenla/deploy/deploy-interface.org
  :Created:   2017-05-19T05:48@Prek Leap (11.642600N-104.919210W)
  :ID:        6da13a89-7693-4aba-b661-da8f47af7454
  :VER:       548419757.751734302
  :GEO:       48P-491193-1287029-15
  :BXID:      proj:WLL5-8440
  :END:
#+INCLUDE: ./inc/head.org
#+INCLUDE: ./inc/macros.org

{{{breadcrumbs}}}

#+HTML: <div class="outline-2" id="meta">
| *Author*  | Brad Collins <brad@chenla.org>             |
| *Date*    | {{{time(%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S)}}}              |
#+HTML: </div>

#+TOC: headlines 4

* Introduction
* Device
* Application
* Descriptive & Proscriptive

 - [[https://craigmod.com/sputnik/as_we_may_read/][As we may read]] | Craig Mod
 - [[https://aeon.co/essays/stagnant-and-dull-can-digital-books-ever-replace-print][Stagnant and dull, can digital books ever replace print?]] | Aeon
   Essays

** Digital Texts

There is a reason that we switched from the scroll to codex.  The
scroll is a terrible interface and it's no different for physical
scrolls or web pages.  We still don't understand that yet.  Scrolls
really do suck at a lot of very basic things that for the codex is
easy.

Do books have branding on every page of the book, other than the
title?  Is the publisher's logo anywhere to be seen except on the
spine and cover page?  Then why subject us to logos on every web page
of a site?  The same goes for author info, links to other services,
like buttons or any crap in a persistent column.

Ebooks keep the clutter down to what it should be.  The iPad
interface, where you can  tap a page to show navigation and where you
are overall in the text is good (needs to be improved but it's good)

The biggest single factor working against ebooks and web pages is that
they are designed to reflow to fit the container that they are in.
Display device makers don't seem to put /any/ thought about how the
size of a screen effects the content shown on it because the web has
separated form factor from content.  This was not always so.

Plain text email is a case in point.  Email messages are written in
plain text with a monospaced font that is typically composed at about
60 characters per line.  This line length worked well in most
terminals and terminal emulators.

Desktop web browsers can be resized to anything the user wants -- so
we get a lot of people who for some reason think it's a good idea to
maximize every window, even if the display is 30" wide and the content
is only a third of that.  Even worse are web sites that will allow
lines to be infinitely long so you get 50 words to a line.  So you
have this perfect storm where the devices are all different sizes, the
windows on those devices are resized indiscriminately and the content
makers each decide what form factor they design for.  These are
unforced errors -- and it results in really crappy interfaces and
reading experiences.  And most important of all, it makes it nearly
impossible to take advantage of the most powerful features that the
codex gives us.

** WTF Mobile

Mobile devices are a round peg in a square hole -- we are trying to
fit things onto tiny screens that don't and won't and can never fit.
people are being told that you can do everything on your mobile device
-- they are wrong in the worst way possible.

Small form factor displays are excellant for a number of things, they
are good as remote controls, dashboards, alerts, instant messaging,
headline news, short videos etc.

But they are not good for providing anything in depth or requiring
long periods of concentration (unless it's a game).

There are any number of people who claim that they happily read whole
novels on their iPhone, but I don't buy it.  These people are deluding
themselves.  Small screens have a very low LOD.  Semantically, you are
seeing things from very far away at low resolution -- there simply is
not enough space to see all of the information that is there.  There
is also no space for providing any context.

I was once asked to build an ERP system in which everything in the
system could be done on mobile phones as well as on laptop and desktop
machines.  

Watching a movie made for the cinema, or reading something that takes
some effort like Gravity's Rainbow will not just a poor experience,
you will get less out of it than if you read or watched it as
intended.

Having everything instantly available everywhere is not always a good
thing, when everywhere mostly means on a tiny screen with tiny
speakers.  Look up clips from the movie or a quote from GR when you
are trying to settle an argument in a bar.  Use the device to make a
note or annotation of something you are watching on a larger display.
But let's stop trying to fit /everything/ into mobile.  It ill-serves
us, and leaves us impoverished.  Waiting is a good thing when done
right.  Anticipation, preparing for something to come allows us to
frame questions, work out what we are looking for.  And waiting is
/very/ important in communications.  There is a world of difference
between an emotional response and a considered reply.  It takes time
for new information to be integrated into our brains, put into context
and letting our limbic system calm down and get out of the way before
we respond to most things.  Email can be checked from mobile devices
and used to send replies in a pinch -- but it should not be the
primary interface used for reading and writing email.

** Hypercard

 - [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypercard][HyperCard]] | Wikipedia
 - [[https://arstechnica.com/apple/2012/05/25-years-of-hypercard-the-missing-link-to-the-web/][25 years of HyperCardâ€”the missing link to the Web]] | Ars Technica

The original Mac Hypercard got paging right -- there was no scroll
only pages.  This was largely possible because each screen was
designed to fit in the original Macintoshes tiny display.

** Plain Text Hypertext

The texinfo hypertext interface (and perhaps gopher, but I can't
remember) got a lot of things right that the web did not.

There is /some/ scrolling but there is definately a page model where
text is broken down into small chunks -- you don't get enormous
scrolls.

** Paging

The codex is all about pages.  Not pages in the web sense, but
physical pages that can be taken in at a glance.  In scrolls, we have
to mentally buffer what was above the screen and maintain a mental
model of what is below.  A page doesn't tax the brain in this way.
You look at the page as a whole, and perhaps the facing page, and you
can see at a glance the overall structure and context of what you are
looking at.  In most cases the text correponds to any charts or
graphics on the same or facing pages.  In a well designed book the
chapter title is a running header at the top.  There is a page number
indicating what page you are looking at (the total number of pages is
implied by the thickness of the book).  You can see the body of text
and if there are any illustrations.  Footnotes are at the bottom in a
smaller font size and in some cases there might be a running
commentary or notes in a column to one side.

There are no publisher logos or branding on every page (sadly there
are exceptions to this), no icons pointing to other functions or
services.  No copyright notices, or menus or search bars.  No login or
registration links.  And no barrage of popups telling you to turn off
ad blockers, or asking you to sign up for things or to fill out a
survey or any of a hundred other distractions.

Paper magazines and newspapers have traditionally had display
advertising, but when done right they do not jar the eye, or take away
from the reading experience.  Good magazines will not have advertising
on at least the first and sometimes even the first several pages,
allowing the reader time to get into the text, and load it in their
brains.  It is only the later parts of articles which may have ads in
them but by then they are only a minor distraction if you are
engrossed in the article and if you are loosing interest then the ads
serve to draw the attention of the reader and help pay the bills.
