#   -*- mode: org; fill-column: 60 -*-

#+TITLE: Big Picture
#+STARTUP: showall
#+TOC: headlines 4
#+PROPERTY: filename
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: 
:Name:      /home/deerpig/proj/chenla/deploy/deploy-intro.org
:Created:   2017-07-20T18:03@Prek Leap (11.642600N-104.919210W)
:ID:        d81a250c-2ac9-46fe-8c00-4a805ad673b9
:VER:       553820671.643480575
:GEO:       48P-491193-1287029-15
:BXID:      proj:SVA3-8856
:Class:     deploy
:Type:      work
:Status:    wip
:Licence:   MIT/CC BY-SA 4.0
:END:

[[https://img.shields.io/badge/made%20by-Chenla%20Institute-999999.svg?style=flat-square]] 
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/class-deploy-0072B2.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/type-work-0072B2.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/status-wip-D55E00.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/licence-MIT%2FCC%20BY--SA%204.0-000000.svg?style=flat-square]]


* Introduction

 - [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biosphere][Biosphere]] | Wikipedia
 - [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biome][Biome]] | Wikipedia
 - [[https://www.britannica.com/science/hydrosphere][hydrosphere]] | Britannica.com (good graphic)
 - [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biotope][Biotope]] - Wikipedia
 - [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_200][Global 200]] - Wikipedia (WWF biome classification system)
 - [[http://planet.uwc.ac.za/nisl/Biodiversity/pdf/OlsonDinerstein1998.pdf][OlsonDinerstein1998.pdf]] -- WWF paper describing classification system
 

 - [[http://www.johnenglander.net/sea-level-rise-blog/oceans-are-71-of-earths-surface-but-more-than-99-of-biosphere/][Oceans are 71% of Earth's Surface, but more than 99% of Biosphere]] |
   John Englander

 - [[https://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/planetfact.html][Planetary Fact Sheets]] | NASA (index)
   - [[https://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/factsheet/earthfact.html][Earth Fact Sheet]] | NASA
   - [[https://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/factsheet/moonfact.html][Moon Fact Sheet]] | NASA
   - [[https://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/factsheet/marsfact.html][Mars Fact Sheet]] | NASA
   - [[https://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/factsheet/chironfact.html][Chiron Fact Sheet]] | NASA
   - [[https://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/factsheet/asteroidfact.html][Asteroid Fact Sheet]] | NASA
   - [[https://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/factsheet/][Planetary Fact Sheet]] | NASA
 
 - [[https://hypertextbook.com/facts/2001/AmandaMeyer.shtml][Mass of the Biosphere]] | The Physics Factbook
 - [[https://aeon.co/essays/we-are-not-edging-up-to-a-mass-extinction][We are not edging up to a mass extinction]] | Steward Brand (Aeon
    Essays)
 - [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Keystone_species][Keystone species]] | Wikipedia
 - [[https://www.thoughtco.com/what-is-a-keystone-species-129483][What Is a Keystone Species?]] | ThoughtCo.
 - [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lithosphere][Lithosphere]] | Wikipedia
 - [[https://scitechdaily.com/earths-water-supply-summed-up-in-one-tiny-bubble/][Earth's Water Supply Summed Up in One "Tiny" Bubble]] | SciTechDaily
 - [[https://www.thoughtco.com/the-four-spheres-of-the-earth-1435323][Atmosphere, Biosphere, Hydrosphere and Lithosphere]] | ThoughtCo.
 - [[http://www.sciencephoto.com/media/159214/view][Global water and air volume - Stock Image E055/0330 - Science
   Photo Library]] 
 - [[https://img.gawkerassets.com/img/197kr3nohaffsjpg/original.jpg][original.jpg (JPEG Image, 800 × 800 pixels)]]
 - [[https://www.gizmodo.com.au/2013/11/astonishing-picture-of-earth-compared-to-all-its-water-and-air/][Astonishing Picture Of Earth Compared To All Its Water And Air]] | Gizmodo Australia
 - [[http://boingboing.net/2008/03/11/all-the-water-and-ai.html][All the water and air on earth gathered into spheres and compared
   to the Earth]] | Boing Boing
 - [[https://img.purch.com/h/1000/aHR0cDovL3d3dy5zcGFjZS5jb20vaW1hZ2VzL2kvMDAwLzAyMC8wNzgvb3JpZ2luYWwvZWFydGgtbWFycy1yZWxhdGl2ZS1zaXplLnBuZw==][Image of earth and mars]]
 - [[http://inbusiness.ae/2016/11/18/earth-has-shockingly-little-water-and-ice-compared-to-these-ocean-worlds/][Earth has shockingly little water and ice compared to these ocean worlds]] | InBusiness


We start with the basic unit being a planetary body.  Not just planets
but planetiods including moons and large asteroids suitible for
building habitats.

* Structure of the Earth

Earth has a core which is broken down into an inner core of solid
iron that gives the planet it's magnetic field (important for
sheilding life from solar and cosmic radiation) which is surrounded by
a molten core, which is surrounded by a semi stable mantle which makes
up the bulk of the planet's mass.  The mantle has a more stable upper
mantle which is then surrounded by a thin crust.  The more stable part
of the upper mantle and the crust are what we live on and are made up
of tectonic plates that move over time and rearrange the continents
and oceans.  This is known as the lithosphere.

Above the Lithosphere is the hydrosphere, which inludes all water in
the oceans and any water vapour in the atmosphere.  Above the
lithosphere is the atmosphere which is the razor thin mixture of
mostly nitrogen and 20% oxygen (and trace elements) what we live in.

Finally, the biosphere is the region between the bottom of the
hydrosphere and the bottom part of the atmosphere that can sustain
life.

It's easy to forget how small the atmosphere and hydrosphere is
relative to the size of the planet.

  [ [ IMAGE ] ] 

* Biosphere

Life on the planet is divided into three primary environments,
terrestrial, fresh water and marine.

These are then in turn broken into different regions called /biomes/
which are characterized by their elevation (or depth in water
environments) atmospheric pressure, rainfall, sunlight, temperature
and soil.

Each biome is broken into smaller biotope which has a specific
collection of plants, animals and micro organisms.  Species of plants
and animals belong to specific biotopes and may differ between
biotopes even within the same biome as sub-species.

The biosphere is governed by the rotation of the earth which allows
the planet to evenly heat and cool, as well as seasonal heating and
cooling from the planet's orbit as it orbits closer or farther from
the sun.

The moon provide gravitational tidal effects which help increase
movement of water in oceans and lakes, as well as in the atmosphere.
Heating and cooling keeps air and water moving around the planet.

The poles recieve less sun than lower latitudes, and variations in the
length of day and night that increases as you move from the equator to
the poles.

The biosphere has water cycles which evaporates water into the
atmosphere, which precipitates back to the surface as rain or snow.
Which then runs off the surface of the planet into rivers and
eventually in the ocean.  Some of that water seeps into the
lithosphere and replentishes underground water stores.

There is a carbon cycle that is powered by plant and animal life.
Plants take in CO2 and spit out Oxygen.  Animals then take oxygen and
spit out CO2.

There is also a Nitrogen Cycle which is used by plants that cycles
nitrogen from the atmosphere to the soil and back again.

* Living outside of Earth's Biosphere

For us to survive outside of earth we must bring an
atmosphere/hydrosphere/biosphere with us.  The atmosphere that we
breath today was created over billions of years by life on the
planet.

We can survive for years, perhaps decades outside the planet by
bringing with us an atmosphere and liquid water.  But in all
likelyhood we will eventually die without a functional biosphere to
support enough biodiversity to produce a health atmosphere, and the
food, we need from plants, animals and micro organisms.  We are
complex creatures that live in an extremely varied and complex
interdependent ecosystem.  We won't survive as a species unless we can
replicate an earth-like biosphere outside of the planet.

Life on earth began in the oceans -- and all land creatures are still,
deep down, largely ocean creatures that learned to walk, crawl or fly
and breath.

We are just starting to understand how the oceans work, and we are
still far from understanding the relationship between land and marine
environments.

It's likely that we will not be successful in recreating our
terrestrial biosphere without a corresponding marine biosphere that is
far larger than the terrestrial space.  So, yes, bringing the ocean
with us to mars will not just be for people who enjoy beaches and
eating fish.   It's likely that it will determine our long term
survival or not.

* Why is all of this important

Everything we are and ever will be is determined by our relationship
to the biosphere and the climate that the biosphere maintains.

* Transactive Man

Homo Sapiens is a transactive species, we lived in small groups called
bands and we divide knowledge and skills between members of the band
into specialties.  Man is not the only transactive species.
Transaction is found in a wide variety of species.  The original
specialization which is seen across most of the living world is the
divide between sexes.  The fact that half of a species can reproduce
and the other can only fertilize set the stage for man to evolve and
take trasaction to a new level.

The difference is that specialization in all creatures but man over
evolutionary time scales and was ingrained in the dna of the spieces
as behaviors.  There was a very hard limit to the amount that an
individual could learn on its own beyond what was hardwired into its
genes.

Man was already a tool builder, but the tools developed stayed the
same for hundreds of thousands of years with little change.  Man is
not the only species that builds tool, but again our first tools were
little more than more sophisticated versions of what other primates
used for tools.

The development of the neocortex in homo sapiens changed that, by
extending the primitive core parts of the brain with general purpose
pattern matching and memory that gave man the ability to learn to
adapt to their environment within a lifetime or at least a generation
or two.

The neocortex can be thought of as an extention of the brain, but that
extension didn't stop there.

Tools are an extension of our physical limbs, allowing us to extend
and amplify what we do far beyond the limits of our senses and
physical bodies.

Spoken language was the next great leap.  Spoken language made it
possible to dramatically expand our ability to specialize and
communicate with each other.  It also established the oral tradition
(Havelock) which created a group encyclopedia of all a groups knowlege
that was passed on from generation to generation through song and
stories.  This maxed out around the time of Plato -- and corresponded
roughly with the invention of writing systems.

The ancient Greeks were the transitional stage between the oral and
the beginning of a written tradition that transformed civilization
from being pockets of tight-knit settlements into the first states.

Writing made a number of things possible -- it extended our ability to
think and reason, by externalizing short term memory as we worked out
problems over hours, days, years or even generations.

Writing is a form of time travel, allowing one to send messages to the
future and to places you will never see to people you will never meet.

Perhaps the most astonishing thing about spoken language, writing and
symbol systems is that it separated information from our brains.
Spoken language allowed us to more precisely share memories and
experiences so that a band would have an oral store of information
that was an extremely powerful survival skill.  But oral traditions
drift over time.  Memories become stories, stories become legands and
legands begin to dissolve into the myths.  Until writing systems were
invented there was no history.  History, is literally, what was
written.  There is no history before writing.  Many people don't
understand that history is not what happened in the past, but a record
of what was recorded in the past.

It also set down oral traditions into external storage which help
syncronize those traditions over large geographic areas.  This helped
establish nations.  Writing systems were only used by a very small
percentage of the population for the next 2,000 years.


* Civilization

Civilization emerged from a long interglacial period that has been
extremely stable, and mild.  This clemant climatic period made it
possible for man to stop wandering the earth following the food.  We
gradually learned to cultivate plants and begin to domesticate
animals, but we didn't yet know how to keep the same land fertile over
many years.  So man ended up settling in a handful of river valleys
where we improved our agricultural techniques and learned to build
permanent strucutures.  The city was born, and with it, civilizization.
